# Foci-counter
A tool to count foci in a cell using DBSCAN

This is a Python script which should be run with the liraries described in the .py file. It first generates 3D image sets that simulate the contents of a cell where a marker stains various biological compartments such as p-bodies, and then counts the foci in each cell. The script produces:
1.  a set of 70 (or as desired) image sets of 100 .tif black-and-white images which stacked would create spherical, gradient-intensity spheres mimicking foci in a 3D space of a cell (included in this repository from one run). Note: when running the script, you may need to choose a new folder each time as default to avoid writing folders on top of existing folders for "cells", which raises errors.
2.  an output file called "data.csv" which stores the pixel intensity values for each sphere in each folder representative of a cell (also included here in the repository).
3.  a second output file called "sphere prediction.xlsx" which stores all prediction results, showing the Cell id, the actual sphere number as was generated and the predicted sphere number, as generated by a DBSCAN modelling.
This repository stores a few of those folders, where the names include the serial number of the folder and the number of foci genereted within them
(serial;spheres format), because of storage limitations.


Context:

Many times in working with more modern microscopy images, we are faced with the difficult task of counting how many foci wof a certain fluorescent marker there are in a 3D scan of a cell. Technologies like Super-resolution, light-sheet microscopy and spinning disk microscopes are now able to give us 3D data with many layers, in opposition to the older, traditional confocal microscopes. It is habitual to resort to flattening the 3D image to a 2d format, where there are simple plug-ins that can generate automated foci counting. Aother means include expensive proprietary technologies such as the one from Imaris.

I develloped a pipeline to create virtual data by generating spheres randomly in a 3d space of 100 stacks, which is a reasonable amount to get to some kind of data about foci in a 3D cell scan, and a second pipeline to train using the most effective machine learning algorhytm. Kmeans clustering with the elbow method worked decently up until about 50 foci, after which it becan to under-represent known values for generated spheres.

The DBSCAN model accurately and quickly guessed the number of spheres in each of the 70 cells I generated, with foci numbers between 2 and 150. Higher numbers may not be often found within the smace of a cell, however the model may also work if tested.

As for the accuracy of the generation of spheres, it was determined in another repository, where I created the images and then assessed their random nature and count by merging the images and cby counting manually the spheres after generating them:
(insert future link here).
